# 8. Controller 1 Training – Center

Below is the checklist of which the C1 training will be completed to ensure competency for the C1 rating. MTR/INS will help guide the CIT student through the units and lessons to help teach the CIT student the information needed to become an effective controller as well as comply with the VATSIM GCAP, VATUSA training guideline, and the C1 OTS Rubric.

The C1 rating is a larger scale S3 rating. It involves more airspace and more airports. The foundation of the C1 rating is very much the same as S3. This rating will consist of primarily online training with HCF Center airspace.

## 8.1 - C1 Lesson 1

### 8.1.1 - Standard Terminal Arrival Procedures (STARS)

There are several things that we want to note on STARS that can make an enroute controller job easier.

**The first part is utilizing descend via clearances.**

- If a STAR has crossing restrictions, then you can instruct an aircraft to descend via the arrival.
- However, if an arrival has a crossing that says “expect” then you must not issue descend via and instead go by SOP's or you can issue the crossing restriction.
- If arrivals do not have crossing restrictions, then the controller should go by the SOP for descents.
- All aircraft should be routed onto STARS if able. This will help ensure that traffic flows into the airport in a consistent stream and help with separation of traffic.

#### 8.1.1.1 - How to space aircraft

- When spacing aircraft there is numerous ways you can do this.
- The most common way is to space aircraft by adjusting their airspeed.
- Changing by Mach .01 up or down can help make small changes.
- However, if you need to make larger changes you can have the pilots turn left/right 30+ degrees as needed to create additional spacing.

#### 8.1.1.2 - Descent Instructions

- Aircraft should be given descent instructions in accordance with their STAR.
- Be careful not to issue descents too early as aircraft could end up burning too much fuel being down lower.
- You also should be careful not to descend aircraft too late and end up causing them to be too high.
- Another thing to keep in mind when giving descent instructions is crossing traffic.
- Ensure that the descent instruction will not put them in conflict with another aircraft.

#### 8.1.1.3 - Oceanic Clearance

- HCF Center contacts Oakland Oceanic with an oceanic clearance request at-least 15 minutes prior to the HCF border. "AAL118 CEBEN 2312z FL350 Mach .82" (Call sign - Fix entering oceanic - Time at fix - Cruise Altitude - Speed)
- He either accepts or gives you a new Zulu time
- At-least 5 minutes prior to the TCP, "Radar service terminated, squawk 2000 contact Oakland Oceanic with a position report".

### 8.1.2 - C1 CHECKLIST ITEMS

- THEORY
  - Demonstrates knowledge of the radar controller with respect to the enroute airspace
  - Explains IFR/IFR separation minima in class A airspace (including super)
  - Provides hazardous weather information example using proper phraseology
- PRACTICAL
  - Descents are given IAW the type of STAR
  - Establishes radar contact with aircraft using proper phraseology and technique (including vectoring at or above MVA)
  - Aircraft are separated and sequenced without loss of separation or airspace violations
  - Positive control is assured
  - Aircraft are given altimeter setting as necessary
  - Traffic call-outs, crossing traffic, low altitude alerts, and traffic alerts are given using prescribed phraseology (including proper application of visual separation outside of class A airspace)
  - Descents are given in a timely manner
  - Vectoring for sequencing and/or separation (Enroute)
  - Vectoring for sequencing and/or separation to Airport finals
  - IFR Clearances from Uncontrolled airports
  - Uncontrolled airports. One-In/One-Out
  - Pop-Up IFR flights (clearances)
  - IFR cancellations
  - VFR Flight following
  - VFR On-Top
  - Holding clearances are issued with proper phraseology
  - Holding clearances are cancelled with proper phraseology
  - Airspace is effectively utilized and managedEnsures relief briefing was understood
  - Conducts relief briefing at end of exam properly
  - Utilizes APREQ and point-outs properly
  - Properly transfers control of aircraft when required
  - Communications are done in a professional manner
  - Only gives communications when necessary
  - Effective working speed is maintained
  - Manages frequency
