# 6. Student 2 Training

## 6.1 - S2 Lesson 1

- Runway Selection
- Landing Clearances
- Wake Turbulence
- Special VFR
- Land and Hold Short
- Traffic Pattern
- Helicopter Operations
- Line-up and Wait
- Intersection Departures
- Line-up and wait procedures are properly utilized IAW the standards 7110.65
- Intersection departures are conducted IAW the standards 7110.65
- Wake turbulence separation is adhered to

### 6.1.1 - Runway Selection

Select the runway most nearly aligned with the wind when 5 knots or more or the “calm wind” runway when less than 5 knots unless use of another runway:

1. Will be operationally advantageous, or
2. Is requested by the pilot.

**TAILWIND COMPONENTS** - When authorizing use of runways and a tailwind component exists, always state both wind direction and velocity.

### 6.1.2 - Landing Clearances

When issuing a clearance to land, first state the runway number followed by the landing clearance. If the landing runway is changed, controllers must preface the landing clearance with “Change to runway” followed by the runway number.

Controllers must then restate the runway number followed by the landing clearance.

PHRASEOLOGY: *“RUNWAY (number) CLEARED TO LAND.” Or “CHANGE TO RUNWAY (number), RUN-WAY (number) CLEARED TO LAND.”*

### 6.1.3 - Takeoff Clearances

When issuing a clearance for takeoff, first state the runway number followed by the takeoff clearance.

PHRASEOLOGY: *RUNWAY (number), CLEARED FOR TAKEOFF.*

EXAMPLE: *“RUNWAY TWO SEVEN, CLEARED FOR TAKEOFF.”*

### 6.1.4 - Wake Turbulence

Apply wake turbulence procedures to an aircraft operating behind another aircraft when wake turbulence separation is required. Separate aircraft taking off by

1. Heavy, large, or small behind super – 3 minutes.
2. Heavy, large, or small behind heavy – 2 minutes.
3. Small behind B757 – 2 minutes.

**SAME RUNWAY SEPARATION** - Separate a departing aircraft from a preceding departing or arriving aircraft using the same runway by ensuring that it does not begin takeoff roll until:

1. The other aircraft has departed and crossed the runway end or turned to avert any conflict.
2. A preceding landing aircraft is clear of the runway.
   1. When only Category I aircraft are involved−3,000 feet.
   2. When a Category I aircraft is preceded by a Category II aircraft−3,000 feet.
   3. When either the succeeding or both are Category II aircraft−4,500 feet.
   4. When either is a Category III aircraft−6,000 feet.
   5. When the succeeding aircraft is a helicopter, visual separation may be applied in lieu of using distance minima.
   6. CATEGORY I small single−engine propeller driven aircraft weighing 12,500 lbs. or less, and all helicopters.
   7. CATEGORY II small twin−engine propeller driven aircraft weighing 12,500 lbs. or less.
   8. CATEGORY III all other aircraft.

### 6.1.5 - SVFR Operations

**SVFR operations in weather conditions less than basic VFR minima are authorized:**

REFERENCE- FAA Order JO 7110.65, Para 2-1-4, Operational Priority.

- At any location not prohibited by 14 CFR Part 91, Appendix D or when an exemption to 14 CFR Part 91 has been granted and an associated LOA established. 14 CFR Part 91 does not prohibit SVFR helicopter operations.
- Only within the lateral boundaries of Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E surface areas, below 10,000 feet MSL.
- Only when requested by the pilot.
- On the basis of weather conditions reported at the airport of intended landing/departure.
- When weather conditions are not reported at the airport of intended landing/departure and the pilot advises that VFR cannot be maintained and requests SVFR.
- SVFR operations may be authorized for aircraft operating in or transiting a Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E surface area when the primary airport is reporting VFR but the pilot advises that basic VFR cannot be maintained

### 6.1.6 - Land And Hold Short (LAHSO)

An aircraft may be authorized to takeoff from one runway while another aircraft lands simultaneously on an intersecting runway or an aircraft lands on one runway while another aircraft lands simultaneously on an intersecting runway, or an aircraft lands to hold short of an intersecting taxiway or some other predetermined point such as an approach/departure flight path using procedures specified in the current LAHSO directive. The procedure must be approved by the air traffic manager and be in accordance with a facility directive. The following conditions apply:

- A simultaneous takeoff and landing operation must only be conducted in VFR conditions.
- Instruct the landing aircraft to hold short of the intersecting runway being used by the aircraft taking off. In the case of simultaneous landings and no operational benefit is lost, restrict the aircraft of the lesser weight category (if known). LAHSO clearances must only be issued to aircraft that are listed in the current LAHSO directive, whose Available Landing Distance (ALD) does not exceed the landing distance requirement for the runway condition.
  - *PHRASEOLOGY: HOLD SHORT OF RUNWAY (runway number), (traffic, type aircraft or other information).*
- Issue traffic information to both aircraft involved and obtain an acknowledgment from each. Request a read back of hold short instructions when they are not received from the pilot of the restricted aircraft
- Issue the measured distance from the landing threshold to the hold short point rounded “down” to the nearest 50−foot increment if requested by either aircraft.
- There is no tailwind for the landing aircraft restricted to hold short of the intersection. The wind may be described as “calm” when appropriate.

The aircraft required landing distances are listed in the current LAHSO directive.

### 6.1.7 - Traffic Pattern

Airport traffic patterns are developed to ensure that air traffic is flown into and out of an airport safely. Each airport traffic pattern is established based on the local conditions, including the direction and placement of the pattern, the altitude at which it is to be flown, and the procedures for entering and exiting the pattern. A traffic pattern consists of an upwind, crosswind, downwind, base, and final leg.

To separate traffic in the traffic pattern there are several options you have.

- Extend a leg of the pattern.
- Left/Right 360's
- Make a Right/Left 270 on base
- Make short approach
- Follow traffic

### 6.1.8 - Helicopter Operations

**HELICOPTER TAKEOFF CLEARANCE FROM MOVEMENT AREA** - Issue takeoff clearances from move-ment areas other than active runways or in diverse directions from active runways, with additional instructions as necessary. Whenever possible, issue takeoff clearance in lieu of extended hover−taxi or air−taxi operations.

*PHRASEOLOGY: (Present position, taxiway, helipad, numbers) MAKE RIGHT/LEFT TURN FOR (direction, points of compass, heading, NAVAID radial) DEPARTURE/DEPARTURE ROUTE (number, name, or code), AVOID (aircraft/ vehicles/personnel), or REMAIN (direction) OF (active runways, parking areas, passen-ger terminals, etc.). CAUTION (power lines, unlighted obstructions, trees, wake turbulence, etc.). CLEARED FOR TAKEOFF.*

**HELICOPTER TAKEOFF FROM NON-MOVEMENT AREA** - If takeoff is requested from non−movement areas, an area not authorized for helicopter use, or an area off the airport, and, in your judgment, the operation appears to be reasonable, use the following phraseology instead of the takeoff clearance

*PHRASEOLOGY: DEPARTURE FROM (requested location) WILL BE AT YOUR OWN RISK (additional in-structions, as necessary). USE CAUTION (if applicable).*

**HELICOPTER LANDING CLEARANCE AT MOVEMENT AREA** - Issue landing clearances to helicopters going to movement areas other than active runways or from diverse directions to points on active run-ways, with additional instructions as necessary. Whenever possible, issue a landing clearance in lieu of extended hover−taxi or air−taxi operations.

*PHRASEOLOGY: MAKE APPROACH STRAIGHT−IN/CIRCLING LEFT/ RIGHT TURN TO (location, run-way, taxiway, helipad, Maltese cross) ARRIVAL/ARRIVAL ROUTE (number, name, or code). HOLD SHORT OF (active runway, extended runway center line, other). REMAIN (direction/distance; e.g., 700 feet, 1 1/2 miles) OF/FROM (runway, runway center line, other helicopter/ aircraft). CAUTION (power lines, unlighted obstructions, wake turbulence, etc.). CLEARED TO LAND*

**HELICOPTER LANDING AT NON-MOVEMENT AREA** - If landing is requested to non-movement areas, an area not authorized for helicopter use, or an area off the airport, and, in your judgment, the operation appears to be reasonable, use the following phraseology instead of the landing clearance

*PHRASEOLOGY: LANDING AT (requested location) WILL BE AT YOUR OWN RISK (additional instruc-tions, as necessary). USE CAUTION (if applicable).*

<p style="text-align: center;color:red;font-style:italic;">**NOTE Utilize the non-movement phraseology if the helicopter is landing/departing an area off airport but within the controlled boundary of the tower. *Example if it is a medical helicopter lifting off or land-ing at a hospital.</p>

### 6.1.9 - Line-Up And Wait (LUAW)

The intent of LUAW is to position aircraft for an imminent departure. Authorize an aircraft to line up and wait, except as restricted (REFERENCE- FAA Order JO 7110.65, Para 3−9−4. LINE UP AND WAIT), when takeoff clearances cannot be issued because of traffic. Issue traffic information to any aircraft so authorized. Traffic information may be omitted when the traffic is another aircraft which has landed on or is taking off the runway and is clearly visible to the holding aircraft.

Do not use conditional phrases such as “behind landing traffic” or “after the departing aircraft.” First state the runway number followed by the line-up and wait clearance.

*PHRASEOLOGY: RUNWAY (number), LINE UP AND WAIT.*

When an aircraft is authorized to line up and wait, inform it of the closest traffic within 6−flying miles requesting a full−stop, touch−and−go, stop−and− go, option, or unrestricted low approach to the same runway.

Do not issue a landing clearance to an aircraft requesting a full−stop, touch−and−go, stop−and−go, option, or unrestricted low approach on the same runway with an aircraft that is holding in position or taxiing to line up and wait until the aircraft in position starts takeoff roll.

*PHRASEOLOGY: RUNWAY (number), CONTINUE, TRAFFIC HOLDING IN POSITION, or RUNWAY (number) (pattern instructions as appropriate) TRAFFIC HOLDING IN POSITION.*

Do not authorize an aircraft to LUAW if an aircraft has been cleared to land, touch−and−go, stop−and–go, option, or unrestricted low approach on the same runway.

Do not authorize aircraft to simultaneously line up and wait on the same runway, between sunrise and sunset, unless the local assist/local monitor position is staffed.

When aircraft are authorized to line up and wait on runways that intersect, traffic must be exchanged between that aircraft and the aircraft that is authorized to line up and wait, depart, or arrive to the intersecting runway(s).

When authorizing an aircraft to line up and wait at an intersection, state the runway intersection.

*PHRASEOLOGY: RUNWAY (number) AT (taxiway designator), LINE UP AND WAIT.*

### 6.1.10 - Intersection Departures

When clearing an aircraft for takeoff from an intersection, state the runway intersection.

*PHRASEOLOGY: RUNWAY (number) AT (taxiway designator) CLEARED FOR TAKEOFF.*

## 6.2 - S2 Lesson 2

- Identifies all airspace classes
- Identifies landing and departing runway
- Landing clearances include wind information when necessary
- Necessary traffic information is given as needed
- Wake turbulence advisories are given as needed
- Defines all parts of VFR traffic pattern.
- Helicopter ground movements are issued IAW the standard
- Helicopter departures at ramp and runway are handled
- VFR aircraft are cleared for the option with or without limitations
- No runway incursions occur
- VFR aircraft in the traffic pattern are adequately spaced
- Defines all parts of the VFR Traffic Pattern
- Defines all part of the Option

## 6.3 - S2 Lesson 3

1. Weather and Runway Use
   1. Properly decodes METAR and TAF.
   2. Identifies landing and departing runway.
2. Runway Operations
   1. Take-off clearances are issued IAW the standards 7110.65
   2. LUAW is utilized IAW the standards 7110.65
   3. Intersection departures are conducted IAW the standard
   4. Same runway separation is adhered to
   5. Wake turbulence separation is adhered to
   6. Landing clearances are issued IAW the standards 7110.65 and include wind information as necessary
   7. Go-Around clearances are properly given and coordinated as necessary
   8. Side-step/change to clearances are properly given
   9. Necessary traffic information is given
   10. Wake turbulence advisories are given as needed
   11. LAHSO is properly utilized
   12. VFR aircraft in traffic pattern are spaced adequately
   13. VFR aircraft are cleared for the option with or without limitations
   14. Helicopter departures at ramp and runways are completed IAW the standards 7110.65
3. Coordination
   1. Ensures relief briefing was understood.
   2. Properly coordinates runway crossings.
   3. Transfers control and communications of aircraft in a timely manner.
   4. Communications are done in a professional manner.
   5. Only gives communications when necessary.
   6. Effective working speed is maintained.
   7. Manages Frequency.
   8. Conducts relief briefing at end of exam properly

## 6.4 - S2 Lesson 4

The objective of this lesson is to identify the active runway according to SOP's, issue takeoff and landing clearances.

### 6.4.1 - S2 Lesson 4 – Session Checklist Items

- Line-up and wait procedures and phraseology are properly utilized IAW the standard Intersection departures are conducted IAW the standard Wake turbulence separation is adhered to
- Issues Take Off Clearances with winds and departure headings if necessary.

## 6.5 - S2 Lesson 5

The objective of this lesson is to begin working within HNL Tower delegated airspace, VFR operations, traffic pattern, and helicopters. This lesson is to ensure understanding of clearances and departing IFR traffic. This will also ensure the understanding of airspace, introduce landing clearances, and arrival taxing.

### 6.5.1 - S2 Lesson 5 – Session Checklist Items

- Identifies all airspace classes
- Identifies landing and departing runway
- Clearance issuance
- At least 90% of IFR clearances contain no errors
- At least 90% of VFR clearances contain no errors
- Read back and hear back is assured
- No runway incursions occur.
- No multiple runway crossings are issued
- Aircraft are squawking altitude encoding prior to take-off
- Proper sequencing is utilized including but not limited to departure sequencing, and proper give-way/follow instructions
- Landing clearances include wind information when necessary
- Necessary traffic information is given as needed
- Wake turbulence advisories are given as needed
- Defines all parts of VFR traffic pattern.
- Helicopter ground movements are issued IAW the standard
- Helicopter departures at ramp and runway are handled
- VFR aircraft are cleared for the option with or without limitations
- VFR aircraft in traffic pattern are adequately spaced

## 6.6 - S2 Lesson 6

At the completion of this lesson the CIT student should be at a level to complete the S2 OTS rubric for Solo Certification with minimal errors at the HNL TWR.

### 6.6.1 - S2 Lesson 6 – Session Checklist Items

|   |   |
|---|---|
| *Theory* | 1. Demonstrates knowledge of the Local Control duties and responsibilities.<br>- Defines all parts of the VFR Traffic Pattern<br>- Defines all part of the Option |
| *Practical* | 1. Weather and Runway Use<br>- Properly decodes METAR and TAF.<br>- Identifies landing and departing runway.<br>2. Runway Operations<br>- Take-off clearances are issued IAW the standard.<br>- LUAW is utilized IAW the standard.<br>- Intersection departures are conducted IAW the standard.<br>- Same runway separation is adhered to.<br>- Wake turbulence separation is adhered to.<br>- Landing clearances are issued IAW the standard and include wind information as necessary.<br>- Go-Around clearances are properly given and coordinated as necessary.<br>- Side-step/change to clearances are properly given.<br>- Necessary traffic information is given.<br>- Wake turbulence advisories are given as needed.<br>- LAHSO is properly utilized.<br>- VFR in traffic pattern are spaced adequately.<br>- VFR aircraft are cleared for the option with or without limitations.<br>- Helicopter departures at ramp and runways are completed IAW the standard.<br>3. Coordination<br>- Ensures relief briefing was understood.<br>- Conducts relief briefing at end of exam properly.<br>- Properly coordinates runway crossings.<br>- Transfers control and communications of aircraft in a timely manner.<br>4. Professional Development<br>- Communications are done in a professional manner.<br>- Only gives communications when necessary.<br>- Effective working speed is maintained.<br>- Manages Frequency. |
